So in the previous video, we started
talking about the for loop in Python.
So let's actually continue on with that
now with a few more advanced examples.
So I'm gonna actually delete the code
that we had from the previous video.
And just a bit of a recap, that unlike
many other languages such as C and C++,
for loops in Python work by having
a variable iterate over a set of values.
So the difference is with C and C++ and
Java, for loops can be read as something
along the lines of for i starting at 1
up to 20 in steps of 1, do something.
If Python,
the follow-ups read more like, for
i, taking each of the values in
the following sequence, do something.
Now it doesn't sound like there's
a great difference with that.
But the actual difference of the different
approach to for loops that Python uses,
makes it really powerful, incredibly
powerful, but also very flexible.
So in our example in previous video,
we wanted to show a follow with an index
taking values from zero to
the length of the string.
But because the string is a sequence, what
we can actually do is we can simplify that
a great deal and set our loop variable to
each of the characters in the sequence.
So it sort of cuts out a step there,
if you will.
Now what we could do is we could leave the
variable name as i, but we'll change it to
char because it's no longer being
used as an index in the string.
And this will actually work better,
make more sense,
if you see the code up there on top.
So in this example it's also a string of
length one rather than integers sideways.
So let's just have
a look at that code now.
So I'm going to type that number again.
So what I'll do is undo that and go just
to the first line, the first two lines,
we'll keep those because we
need to clean one as well.
I'll just delete this and redo it again so
it make sense as I'm typing it.
So this time instead of using the len and
so forth, you know the len for the number.
We can put for char in number.
And what that's going to do is extract
a character that each position in that
number string.
And then we can put something
like if char in 0123456789 colon.
If it is,
then we do the same as we did before.
CleanedNumber, equals,
cleanedNumber plus char.
So, again, we're not having to use that
number and the index position with the i
anymore because we're actually
using the for char directly.
And, again, getting back to the for
loop, your number.
As it was before enter cleanedNumber,
print the number.
Is the format number.
We should find this works exactly
the same as it did before.
Number is 92, blah, blah,
blah, blah, blah, 87.
But, you notice how this has significantly
reduced the amount of code for and number.
And it's actually a lot
more readable as well.
We no have to use that i number anymore.
And we no longer have to access each
of the characters by using number and
i in square brackets
as we used previously.
So, just to confirm that the for
loop assigns each character in
the sequence number to a loop
variable character as it's going through
each element in the actual string itself.
So each time around the loop the variable
char has the value of the next character
from our string number.
Now, we're gonna be actually
looking at lists soon, but
a list is just a sequence of
things that we can use a for
loop for to iterate through them,
as in this examples.
I'm actually talk some more
code to show you what I mean.
So, I'm gonna put something like for,
state in ["not pinin",
"no more"] a stiff, bereft of life.
We'll run this and then we will
just go through and talk about it.
This parrot is plus state and
that's opposed to doing
something like this, print.
This parrot is, you could have done,
.format state.
Now not because our sequence was
a list of strings, you can see here.
We've actually got a list of strings.
So that's actually square bracket and
the list of strings separated with commas.
Now, because of that,
because it's a sequence of strings,
we can just state to the text
this parrot is plus state.
And what it's gonna do each
time it goes through the loop,
it's going to actually add one
of these to it automatically.
And best way to see this
is actually run it.
This parrot is, you see the first time
it went through, not that one there.
The second time I went through the for
loop, is no more.
This parrot, is a stiff, and
fourth this parrot is bereft of life,
that's supposed to be, not lift.
[LAUGH] Of life.
So you can see how the for loop is
actually worked there, it's actually
sort of went through the sequence
one element at a time, so to speak.
And just as a confirmation
I've commented it out but
we could equally put the parrot is and
use ".format(state).
And it would be up to you to decide which
one you think would be more readable.
My personal opinion is this one is
more readable and is basically less
code as well, and just you to actually
look at the previous one and that is,
okay the four state values set to each
time we go through the four loop.
And speaking of for loops the range,
and we used the range previously for
a for loop,
the range is also a sequence tie.
It just specifies the start and end,
rather than listing all values.
In other words it's like a sequence
of values, much like this, but
instead of actually listing each and
all of them,
we're actually listing just the start and
the end as I mentioned.
In actual fact, the range is more
than a start and end value, but
it can also include step.
We haven't seen that before.
So let's actually go through and
type that in.
So we can do something
like 4 i in range 0, 100,
but we can also introduce the third
parameter which is the step.
And that's how much it's going
to jump in between each loop.
So if we actually run this.
Probably would be the easiest way to see
remain.format i, so,
we actually run that now.
So, you can see it's actually started on
element zero which would expect because
we started on the value of zero.
But, notice how it skipped to five,
and that's what this third thing here,
this step value is.
It means to step ahead.
How many each time we go through
the loop should we had two Is.
So, in other words, i zero,
the first time five, the second time 10,
the third time 15 and so
on through until we got to 95.
Bring them on then it goes one
less than the actual range,
the ending range that we've added here.
And because we're stepping in values of
five, I finished at 95 instead of 100.
Now just as you've seen nesting in for
[INAUDIBLE] used, if statement and so
forth to nest model ifs.
We can actually nest loops as well.
So we can actually nest a for
loop within another loop,
and that's a really powerful
way to process data.
So here's an example of how we can
generate the times table used to teach
children multiplication.
So we can put for i.
Don't forget,
making sure we're starting to the left,
so we're not getting caught
up in any previous code.
For i in range.
Should be i range 1,13, and
obviously that's gonna go and
give us, go through 1 and 12, 1 to 12.
And for j in range 1 to 13 as well.
And then we can do print.
Times zero is two .format, and
it's gonna be i j, i times j.
And then we can go print.
We can actually put a spacer
between each major number that we're
actually going through and processing.
So if I actually run that,
you can see what it's actually done there.
Scrolling back up to the top.
We start on the one times table,
one times one is one.
Two times one is two.
And so on right to 12.
Then we start at the two times table and
three times table, and
right through until we got to the last
part which was a 12 times table.
12 times 12 is 144.
And you can see how that was created
with only a minimal amount of code, and
that also the indent level again is really
important here because if we put print in
the wrong spot, actually print it
up in there to that level instead.
We get a completely different result.
We actually get the equal signs with each
time we've actually done a calculation.
So, again, make sure you do watch your
indent levels to make sure they're
actually in the right spot when
you're actually processing your code.
And just another thing we can do
here just before we end the video.
We can actually change the print
function's n character for a tab.
And once we do that we can actually
produce a pretty neat table.
So, we can come back up here to print and
put end equals slash t and
put a comma there as
well to make it valid.
And now you can actually run that you
can see we have something completely
different, and we're actually
going from left to right now.
And we just make this a little bit
wider it will probably make more sense.
And that would just be a way
to actually expand it out.
And actually I've got the equals sign
probably shouldn't be there now with
this example.
So I'm just gonna comment those out.
We run this again.
And we're going from left to right now.
You can see 1 times 1 is 1,
2 times 1 is 2.
We're going right across from left right.
And just to pretty it
up a little bit more,
what we could also do then is
here on this indent level.
Let's actually print.
Let's go to a new line at this point,
just so
it actually reads a little bit nicer for
each time we change the number.
We'll just print an empty string like so.
So now if we run that, you see we're
going to for each times table now, and
it's looking a little bit more order.
So it's just another
way to actually try and
sort things from left to right,
just close it.
Run down, window down, so and again,
we have to print an empty string
after the inner loop terminates in order
to start each new set of on a new line.
And notice we didn't have to
specify a character for end.
It goes back to being a new line.
The change to a tab is not remembered
from one print call to another.
So, in other words, doing this here is
not remembered when we get to this stage.
That doesn't override that.
Sort of, each time you use your print
statement it doesn't remember anything
from the previous one.
Okay, so that's actually it.
So we're going to end this video here now.
We're not going to actually do
a challenge for the for loop.
But believe me you'll get plenty of time
to actually complete some challenges.
So in the next video we're going to
actually start talking about the continue
and break commands which actually
work hand in hand with what
you've been learning in
this section of the course.
So I'll see you in the next video.